+++
title="2022-01-01"
date=2022-01-01
+++

I miss Euan Garden. 

![Euan Garden](2022-01-01-09-37-04.png)

Euan was a friend, a colleague, and a former boss. He's one of the first
people who pop into my mind when I think of the phrase "a man of character". I
can remember so many stories from our many conversations over the years,
starting with the first time that I met him when he was interviewing to become
my boss in the Technical Computing Group at Microsoft over a decade ago. It
was a normal interview until the end when he started fanboying over some work
that I had done earlier with Delphi and COM. I think that anyone who has met
Euan before could imagine the AMOUNT OF ENTHUSIASM with which said fanboying
was done. But he did it not in a way that would make him seem like he was
angling for the job (despite the circumstances) but in the true spirit of love
for the technology. During that time when Euan was my boss on that amazing
team so long ago he was a great boss, one that would at the same time give me
room to explore crazy ideas and the wisdom to step in when my crazy ideas
would go out of control :)

At some point, it became clear to all of us that Technical Computing was not
going to be a thing at Microsoft. When I was recruited into the Windows team
(hi, Mahesh!) coincidentally to own COM and to build the new WinRT programming
model on top of it, I had to break the news to Euan over the holidays. I
needed to do it in person, so I remember driving over to his old house (he
wound up moving across the street to his new house believe it or not) to break
the news. As you might expect, Euan was gracious and helpful during the
transition as that was going to become my first experience with being a
manager at Microsoft.

We were never too far away from each other over the years. I remember random
conversations with him that included:

- How to talk to the police if you happen to have shot an intruder in your
  house
- Why driving to work in a scooter while wearing shorts was the only way to
  travel in December in Redmond
- Why having an Xbox in every room in your house as a media extender was the
  only way to live
- Why Thinkpads are the ONE TRUE LAPTOP

We re-united on the same (larger) team when I joined the Python team after my
stint in Windows. It was great having him just upstairs from me where I could
drop in to get his sage advice on many things as I sought to be helpful to my
new team. His work then was deeply influential on some things that I'm working
on now. When we ship, it's going to be in no small part due to our many chats
over the years. I'm proud to be able to carry forward his work and I'll
continue to think of him often as we continue on his journey.

Godspeed, Euan.
