+++
title="2021-11-30"
date=2021-11-30
+++

{% block() %}
I like to listen to podcasts during my morning job as an Uber driver for my
kids. Today was [Andrew Chen being interviewed by Tim
Ferris](https://tim.blog/2021/11/30/andrew-chen/), and in the first 15 minutes
there were two wonderful anecdotes from it.

The first is [My Life in
Advertising](https://www.amazon.com/Life-Advertising-Scientific-Classics-Library/dp/0844231010)
which describes some of the origins for common advertising techniques today.
One I loved was the story around the invention of the coupon which helped to
solve the chicken-and-egg problem that product people had at the turn of the
century. Retailers wouldn't stock your product because customers were not
asking for it. But customers wouldn't ask for it if they didn't see it on the
store shelves. So Claude Hopkins invented the coupon - and ran ads in the
local newspaper. Then he would go around to all the different retailers to
stock the product and tell them that about the coupon in a future edition of
the newspaper and how they would have angry customers trying to redeem the
coupon if they didn't buy some stock of the product. Demand generation!

[![My Life in Advertising Book](2021-11-30/2021-11-30-07-53-09.png)](https://www.amazon.com/Life-Advertising-Scientific-Classics-Library/dp/0844231010)

The second was how [Sean Ellis](https://www.linkedin.com/in/seanellis/) in the
early days of SV startups would go around talking to young founders and
explain how he could help them "with their marketing". The negative
connotations around the word would invariably send the wrong impression about
the work that he _really_ did, which was helping companies grow. So he
invented the term "growth hacking" to describe what he does. Brillaint.
{% end %}

Feature idea: add an last updated (human readable time) byline to the top of
the blog.

Andrew Chen has a [blog](https://andrewchen.com/) of sorts, which is now
called a "newsletter" these days. For his job as a VC, it's all about the deal
flow and writing content helps to attract deal flow. What's cool is that he's
been doing it since 2005. A complete list of his
[essays](https://andrewchen.com/list-of-essays/).
